and the team that have come in. Welcome to-
They're still coming.
Yeah, they're still coming through the door.
You're our first minister that we've got here in DNA this morning, so
great to have you with us for an hour.
And I know that you will likely have an
introduction for us, a short introduction, and then I will open up for questions.
So, I'll hand over to you.
Fabulous. Thank you, Madam Chair. Well, good morning, everybody.
And thank you for having me here this morning, as well as all my
officials. And I expect, given this is an operational department, we'll also
be relying heavily on their individual expertise.
As Minister of Internal Affairs, I oversee a department that
supports New Zealanders throughout their lives.
I expect it to do so efficiently, with careful cost
management and a clear focus on delivering its core
responsibilities. The Internal Affairs portfolio is
broad. It includes identity and life event
services, our national collections through Archives New
Zealand and the National Library, regulatory functions, and
support for major inquiries. I am also responsible for
appropriations within Vote Internal Affairs.
I'm also responsible for two Crown entities, Fire Emergency New
Zealand and the Classifications Office.
And from the 1st of July this year, one Crown entity
called Safety Net Critical Communications This includes
reviewing their performance, participating in the setting and monitoring of their
strategic direction and targets, and making appointments to their
boards.
I'm pleased to report a strong start to this year, with my
ministerial portfolio progressing a number of key
legislative priorities. We have passed the Online
Casino Gambling Act alongside the associated
regulations, as well as the Regulatory Systems
Amendment Act. I also acknowledge the role of this
committee in that work.
I'm sure there was a lot of work that went into it, and so I very much appreciate
your diligence over those matters.
Since becoming minister, I've been pleased to see faster, more
efficient services being delivered.
New Zealanders are now receiving their passports in around three
working days, down from 27 days of
waiting when I came into office,
and receiving citizenship in about 50 working days,
down from a wait time of 180 days.
These processing times reflect sustained improvement in
performance.
The department continues to deliver value through its stewardship
of New Zealand's knowledge and history.
I recently, this year, launched ANZAC Stories, a new
digital learning platform designed to help young people
across the country explore ANZAC
histories. This platform was developed by Archives
New Zealand and the National Library, using national
collections to make these stories more accessible to future
generations. I recently opened the Heritage
Campus on 25 March this year, and the new
archives building, Te Rua, was delivered on time and
under budget. I've continued to champion work to strengthen
key systems and services across this portfolio.
I've also taken further action on public lending rights, proposing
amendments to regulations to improve that scheme.
These updates aim to reduce administrative burden for both authors
and the National Library, and simplify access to payments for
authors. The department has made good progress in a disciplined
fiscal environment, improving performance and focusing on its core
role, and I'm confident that will continue this year.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I welcome-
Thank you
... questions from the committee.
Thank you, Minister. And I have first question from Mike, then Lisa.
Thank you, Minister. I just have
a question on the online casino gambling, because
there's obviously been a significant decrease in funding
from over six million to two million, and see the bill's
passed and about to go into the auction process.
I'm just wondering if there's sufficient
funding to actually do that process justice.
So, the online casino gambling legislation and the
regulations put in place the scheme for the licensing
of online gambling.
The functions of that regulator will be funded
through levies directly onto the licensed providers,
rather than coming directly from core funding.
So, I don't expect there to be any difficulty with
overseeing the licensing process, because that will be
directly funded by the expressions of interest
process as well as the ongoing license year
on year.
And will online casino operators that were
operating with New Zealand prior to that coming in
place, will they be excluded from the auction process?
That is not my understanding. There
shouldn't be anything
prohibiting somebody putting forward an expressions of interest.
It is simply a question of whether or not they meet the thresholds
for the license itself, whether they meet the standards that the
department and the secretary expect of them.
But there is no barrier to somebody putting forward an expression of interest,
other than the $19,000, I believe, that needs to be stumped
up for an expression.
But weren't they operating illegally in New Zealand prior to
this act? And do they have the social license, I guess, to then
put an application
in?
Well, the difficulty here is
we do actually want to have a competitive market, and it's
not for me as a minister to say that any one particular person will be precluded,
given that I don't actually know who's going to be putting themselves forward.
It's possible that only people who put themselves forward have never
acted in the New Zealand market prior to this point, but
it's also possible that the only people that we have coming forward are people who
have acted in this space, and there won't be any new players.
It is really a question for the secretary as to whether or not they
believe that the certain license conditions have been met as part of that
expressions of interest process and the licensing auction.
But it's not for me as a minister to preclude and say any particular person
is in or out of the system at this point in time.
Chair.
Very quick supplement. Thank you, Minister, for your opening comments.
In terms of, and you've just alluded to the last question in terms of the Secretary
of Internal Affairs, but I just wanted to ask, is your expectation, or can you
explain the suitability or assessment criteria of those
licensees have
in terms of the budget? Will there be any work in terms of that?
Yes, I can ask our official here to go into more
detail on the licensing process in terms of what sort of
standards may be required of any license
as part of the auction.
Mōrena. John Sneed, Acting Dep Sec
of Regulatory and Identity. So, there's effectively a two-stage assessment
process. The first is an expression of interest process.
There will be a high-level assessment of suitability, meeting some
pretty high-level criteria around, for example,
association with
Organised crime, for example. And anyone who
passes that stage will be through the competitive auction process.
Following the competitive auction process, which they'll
they'll be assessed against a range of criteria, which will include their harm
minimization standards, their age verification standards, consumer
protection standards, basic minimum technical standards to ensure security and
integrity of the information they hold on the platform.
So coming out of the auction process, there's still actually quite
a significant assessment process against those criteria before someone will be
licensed.
Thank you. And just quickly.
Yeah.
And so the question will be, is the
enough to cover those processes in terms of starting up the
system?
We're comfortable that the
funding system that's been set up is going to be able to deliver sufficient
resources to the department to oversee these.
Thank you.
And Andy Hazell, sir.
Yeah, so just on the criteria. So once you've got through
the first hurdle, you're not involved with crime
or anything like that. But the criteria, and just to follow up with Mike's question
as well. The
assertion that people are operating illegally, my understanding is that, in fact,
they can't have been operating illegally because there was no law saying you
couldn't operate. There is now a law which says that you can't operate
without having a license, so they would be operating illegally if they were to
operate without a license going forward.
But at the moment, in the past, they have not been because there has not been a law
prohibiting it. Correct?
That's correct.
Yeah.
It was unregulated.
Right. Okay. So the area of question I just wanted to test was, so once
we got through that first hurdle, the competitive auction, so clearly there's a
whole range of different
criteria. It's not just simply who's going to give the most money.
One of the criteria we did put in there was the New Zealand connection.
There's one you didn't mention. I just wanted to check that that was actually going
to be-
Yeah
... because it's now a requirement in the law.
So a New Zealand connection is at least they say whether they've got one or
haven't.
And also that that's required to be considered.
It doesn't mean it's a determinative factor, but it is required to be considered.
Look, I need to double-check and come back to the committee on that specific
requirement. Certainly, there is a requirement for, for example, to have a New
Zealand registered address so that we have-
Yeah
... have the opportunity to communicate with them.
In terms of that specific point, I'll get back.
It was things like, do they have people based in New Zealand in terms of
employment? Do they have sort of benefit to New Zealand in terms of
beyond 4%, perhaps those kind of issues.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah. There's no requirement to have a long-standing connection to
New Zealand.
It's not a requirement, it's a consideration.
Mm-hmm.
But the
department is required to have that cons- to give consideration to that.
Doesn't mean they've got to have it, but it's just a factor.
Understood.
Along with all the other ones you mentioned. Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, the difficulty of weighing up
long-standing connection versus being based offshore,
the important thing here is that they have an ability to be contacted in
an online world for the regulations.
There's also another difficulty here of if we restricted it to physically
based-
That's not what I'm saying
... New Zealand platforms-
... you'd significantly reduce the market.
Yeah.
So I'm not actually sure what your question is really pointing to.
No, my question was there was a range of criteria as well as simply the financial
criteria. The range of criteria, which are obviously to be considered, that
was just simply one of them. It's just that you hadn't mentioned it.
And it doesn't mean it's determinative in any way, but it is just one of those
criteria.
Thank you for that.
Okay.
Catch you all.
Thank you, and we'll move to Melissa.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thank you for being here, Minister.
The Civic Information Service appropriation is the largest in the
vote with $246.2 million. Which
basically,
it's to fund the operations to produce identity products, I'm guessing,
passports and citizenship and all of that stuff.
But you actually talked about passports taking only three working
days and citizenship 50 working days.
How does that actually compare to when you became minister?
Oh, thank you for the question. Look, the department has gone
through quite a lot of
increase in volume. We are expecting
increase within the passport system because of the 10-year passport
coming into play,
and that taking effect for all the renewals this year.
As well as citizenship with the changes from labor
coming through this year as well with the
increase to residency pathways, now allowing people up to
five years to citizenship. So we're expecting an increase in both
sides.
So the department has known that this increase is likely to happen
this year and next year. And so we have been
prioritizing efficiency of service.
When I first came into office, however,
it was quite shocking to me some of the statistics
and the service efficiencies within particularly the
citizenship pathway. And so,
for the last six years,
the citizenship office has not met its targets.
However, for the last seven months we have
consecutively met targets of having
90% processed within 75 days. That had not happened for the
previous six years.
Okay.
And I'm really thrilled that the department
has met the message that we need to ensure that New
Zealanders, when they're accessing government services, receive
timely service, and that we have efficiency top of mind.
And they have responded very well to that.
One of the things that I asked of the department to do was
to start prioritizing older cases first because-
In one respect, it's very easy to try and meet your KPI of
having as many processed quickly as possible, but then
leaving the hard ones in the too hard basket.
And I was very annoyed and upset for individuals
whose files were coming across my desk at the
time when I encountered some that were years old, that had been sitting there in
the too hard basket. Doing both at the same time of increasing
the processing, which I'm happy for one of our officials to talk to
some of that in detail about how they have done that operationally,
as well as prioritizing those old backlog cases, has really ramped
us up to be able to be prepared for the surge in demand that will be
happening across both sides
of the citizenship and passport office.
But one area that has changed through this term of government has been
cross-skilling with the teams within passports and
citizenship, so that the teams can fluctuate
between working on just the citizenships or just the passports, but now
working on both to ensure that we actually have the right
people at the right time, keeping both of the wait times
low.
Supplementary to that. Just talking about how you have managed to
meet the target, did you set a different target, or was it the same target all the
time, and it's a method of how they operated that actually
increased the processing,
I guess, productivity? Or did you actually input
AI? Did you-
No
... What is the change that has actually seen this outcome?
Yeah. There's been a range of changes, and I'm happy for Hoani to talk to them
in more detail. We have used more AI.
We have also done more, like I say, of actually
trying to focus on clearing the oldest files first, which has
done an effect of bringing us up to having shorter wait
times.
But do we have an official that can talk to the specific operational functions?
Yes. I'll just ask Greg to come up, if that's okay.
Thank you.
And whilst he's making his way to the table. Good morning, everyone.
I'm Hoani Lambert. I'm acting for Paul James, who is the
secretary for DIA, and I'm the acting secretary
currently. So as the minister was saying, the
targets and standards for passports and citizenship have not changed.
The challenge that we had was actually meeting those targets as
a department. So,
the reduction in passport processing times has
been significant. So we were pushing up near 30 days three years
ago. We've managed to get that down now to three days.
Now, that's well below standard, and there's a few reasons for
that. Much of it is beyond our control, interestingly,
and that is because of the challenges we've had with the impacts of
conflict in the Middle East and what that has done in relation
to projected demand for passports.
It's much lower at the moment, and that's largely due to the
increased surge that we were anticipating being delayed.
We are anticipating that as things settle in the Middle East, and that there's a
way forward for the Strait of Hormuz, and then you eventually get
confidence building with New Zealanders to start considering travel again,
that we will see that surge start to manifest in our
processing numbers. The underlying driver for the
surge, of course, is the expiry of 10-year passports, which
began this year. We're expecting our
normal average of processing per month of around about
38,000, or 480,000 passports a year.
We were anticipating that to increase to around about
800,000 passports a year, or around about
70,000 passports per month on average.
We have seen an increase, so we've lifted up to 53,000 for May.
But we are expecting that once those surge numbers start to manifest,
that we will see the numbers of passport
applications coming through the system hit that 70,000 mark and that surge to
continue for around about four years through to 2030,
'31. Which means we've been anticipating a surge which hasn't quite
manifested, which means we've probably got more staff at the moment than we
had required. That has delivered a greater than anticipated
processing. But also, we have made some technological changes
and some improvements to our digital servicing.
And just whilst we're on passports, I'll get Greg to talk about those.
Yeah. So we've been running what we've been calling the Identity Services
Acceleration Program for-
Can you pull the microphone in?
Sure.
Yeah, so we've been running the Identity Services Acceleration Program for over 12
months, and so we've been focusing on just improving people, processes, and
systems. And we've been doing a lot of work retraining staff to just make sure
they're really competent. We've been looking to streamline processes, make them
more efficient, and we've been looking to improve our systems.
With citizenship, for example, in March 2025, we went live
with a major system upgrade, where we've automated the assessment of the
system end to end.
We've got interfaces with Immigration New Zealand, so we can API
status and presence information. We do a range of automated calculations.
And so we can actually assess entitlement upfront in an automated fashion
and then present those results to our staff if there's any exceptions, so they've
got a clear picture of what they need to do.
And we've seen significant backlog reductions because of that, so we're
definitely around 15% more efficient in processing
since we've gone live with those changes.
And as I've said, we've streamlined processes, and so we've just had a really big
focus on bringing that backlog down.
And at the moment, we've got about 10,000
citizenship applications in the queue, and that has been as high as almost 40,000.
So yeah, we're just a full court press in that space.
We've done the same thing in the passport space.
We've been really focusing on, again, clear automation where it's possible
And so adult renewals, we do a range of automated checking,
and if they are simpler applications, we expect those to process straight through,
so no human touch. That used to be sitting at about 28% of
adult renewal applications with straight-through process.
That's now sitting at 53%. And again, we've also done some things that,
better training of our people, better processes, aligning ourselves.
We ran a lot of capacity tests to just see how quickly we could process,
and process without error. And so we put those new processes into the
system to make sure that our people are effective, our processes are effective, and
of course, we've really tuned our systems.
We-- Sorry.
Last one because-
Oh.
We've-
Too many
... been going a wee while.
Okay, too many questions. In terms of the automation and the AI
basically included in the processing, and that you're talking
about 100% fully automated, where does the accuracy, I
mean-
Yeah
... lie in terms of checking to make sure that the citizenship,
when people are actually given citizenship and getting New Zealand
passports, is actually accurate?
Yes. So there are still two human checks for all citizenship
application.
It's more of a rules-based assessment, and it pulls
information directly from authoritative sources.
So we actually pull information from Immigration New Zealand that confirms that
they are residents in New Zealand, they
have permanent residence, they've been here for five years.
So we do a lot of what we would call automated system checking.
Even with the criminal records and all of those checks that you're actually doing
already-
We have real time-
All of those are actually done.
Yeah. Yeah, we have real-time checks with the police, and they provide that
information, and of course, if there's no criminal convictions, these things come
through as all of these checks have been complete, and they are clear.
Our people then can make a simple assessment on that and move it through for
processing. However, if there are exceptions, then our people obviously
follow up with the police, handle those with customers, and then make
determinations that go through different processes for submission.
Yeah.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah, and just to follow up on that, if I can give a little bit of assurance that
I'm constantly receiving submissions that don't meet the
criteria as well,
mostly where it comes to people who have not clearly met the five years
or don't clearly meet good character requirements.
The minister individually must be satisfied that they do or
decline them, whereas for the majority of people, they don't have a
criminal conviction. They haven't done anything wrong.
They have been here for five years, and they do want to follow the law.
But for the exceptions, that's where a flag in the system is raised.
Okay, thank you. Limona.
Thank you. Thanks, Minister. I want to ask a question around FENZ and
then the vote,
3.492 million over the next two years.
Can you explain how
the estimated increased fuel costs will, over time,
impact on that budgeted vote? And also,
what has the price-- how did you get to that budget?
How well the workings in terms of that allocation for FENZ over the next
two years?
Yeah. Well, thank you very much. Look, I think everybody is aware that
we've been going through a bit of a crisis globally as well as here in New Zealand
with fuel shock. One of the things that the government has been
very clear on is that no matter what happened, whether we were at sort
of one, two, three, or four, it was crucial that our fire and
emergency system as well as all of our emergency
responders-
Mm-hmm
... had access to fuel suppliers to ensure that we
still had capacity around the country.
As part of the budget process,
I was asked by the Minister of Finance to put in a budget bid
for fire and emergency, and so for the particular numbers
of how much
was needed for fire and emergency, that came down to officials
from the Department of Internal Affairs as well as Fire and Emergency had
to come up with some specific numbers for how much extra they
thought they might need for added capacity.
However, that was also part of a Treasury-based analysis rather
than from my direct office. But I'm happy for Amanda here to
speak more to that.
Good morning. Amanda Moran.
So in the budget, there was 2.278 million included
for covering Fire and Emergency's additional potential fuel
costs.
And that, as was set out in the way that the minister's described, including
looking at general processes across all of government to make sure that there
was an equitable distribution of the money available to
help with the fuel crisis.
Thank you.
Yeah.
And just in terms of prioritizing those response activities within
the budget line with Treasury,
can you elaborate that two years? Do you think that that will be enough
based on those workings for FENZ in terms of that vote
specific?
Look, at this particular juncture in time, I do feel confident in that.
Clearly, we are dealing with a very dynamic global
situation.
I'm very happy to report even in this last week, it appears that, or at least
I shouldn't get too ahead of myself.
It appears that we have some form of consensus happening in
the Middle East,
where the strait will be reopened.
And it really does come down to what the fuel prices
will be doing day to day, week to week.
It is near impossible to forecast out-
Sure
... based on what will be happening globally.
However, I do know that Fire and Emergency did their best to
forecast out based on a range of different factors.
But how they came to those particular different factors is probably best
directed at Fire and Emergency officials themselves as to their own
assumptions that they built into how much did they want to request
from Treasury.
Thank you.
Okay. Lisa.
Just want to... Different topic.
Want to talk about, in your opening address, you actually talk about the
collaboration between the National Archives and the Library
Services on Anzac Stories.
Have they ever collaborated? Because most people would actually think that archives
are where you actually store old things, and library, basically,
it's a library. So what is this Anzac Stories
and what prompted that kind of collaboration?
Oh.
And are there going to be any other such?
Because often people don't think of archives and libraries.
Yeah. Well, thank you for the question.
Look,
I'm really thrilled by the work that archives and libraries have done in this
collaboration. They haven't worked on a digital collaboration
before, which is really what I was asking for as a minister.
Why?
One of the
reasons why was because I deeply
believe in the proper education of our next generations
coming through the schooling system, and one of the things that I'm very
passionate about is ensuring that we know about our history here in New Zealand.
And, I'm very thankful that for myself,
my mother has made me very aware of our connection to the wars,
and my great-grandfather fought at Gallipoli himself, and I've been very
aware of that story in our family. But I know for some
other members of our community, that's not the case, but they want to know how they
can be attached to this country and what our shared history is.
When it came to
delving into some of our national days, in particular for
Anzac Day, I asked our library as well as our
archive to work together,
on the sources that they had digitized to make them
accessible in a child-friendly way for the
next generations. And what's come out has been a really
good product. So Anzac Stories, which is featured
on the library's website, delves into
depths of individual stories that have been written
by a children's book author, then checked with war historians to
make sure they are factually accurate, using
footage as well as archival material from both library and
archives to build those collaborative stories.
Now, I know from some very early feedback that I've received, there's been
30,000 views of that particular page, which I understand is
much higher than we usually get on the National Library
website, for about eight minutes a session, which is also
very unusually long, which means that people are actually engaging with the
material. And I hope that over years to come, they will engage further.
But we do have our chief librarian here to talk further about that.
Morena. Rachel Essen, national librarian.
And just to add to the statistics that the minister's just
shared, the other thing is that it's driving people who haven't
previously used National Library and Archives to the site.
So approximately 54% of those
30,000 visits are from people who hadn't
been to the site before. But it's been the opportunity,
with the new heritage campus for archives and library
to work together more closely. This is a natural
progression of that, so we've physically come together.
We've got a new structure that brings us together organizationally,
and now that means that we're able to do a lot more,
and
produce things like the Anzac Stories.
This is intended as a pilot. We've learnt from how
to deliver that, and we will be looking at other topics
that we can deliver. And it was a really great co-design
process. We involved two local schools, Belmont School and
Adventure School in Porirua. And children from those schools
actually had an opportunity to model the
site and provide feedback and particularly suggest the
interactive
aspects of it, so the quizzes and things.
And they came to the launch, when the minister launched the site, and it was just
great. We also took the opportunity to show them physical
things from the collection. And other research has shown
that once you've engaged with something online, you're more interested in
seeing it physically. So it was great.
Looking forward to more.
Awesome.
You guys are ignored.
Yeah.
National Archives and the libraries.
That's right.
Wonderful work.
Thank you.
Andy, you want to jump on that?
Yeah, just a quick sup because I actually asked this question yesterday
when we had MCH in front of another committee.
And, it was a question about Ngā Tapuwae and the various different
interpretation that they do.
Mm-hmm.
But so thinking of your relationship together, Archives and the National Library,
is there any sort of cross-conversation?
I know MCH is not talking about a children's approach,
a children's specific education.
It's more about
general. But what level of collaboration is there or
should there be? Is that an opportunity to do things better?
And I know I specifically asked that question yesterday because some of our
historians are a little disturbed that we've kind of dropped the ball a little bit
after the World War I commemorations.
Yes.
In that area. Not so much, not here, but in that area.
Mm-hmm.
We definitely collaborate really well with our colleagues from
Culture and Heritage.
Good.
And we're very aware of the work that they're doing.
We've also been in discussions with them
to be able to archive any of their website or material
that they're not going to keep updating if that's decisions that are made.
So we work really closely with them to make sure that the overall
picture is preserved and available and accessible for New Zealanders,
wherever they might be.
So that sounds as if... Because the question which got raised, this was at a
fairness book town event with Chris Pugsley-
Mm-hmm
... Carter. And the question which was raised, who is the best
curator-
Mm
... the best guardian for all of this kind of material?
Because it did feel like MCH had kind of backed away a little bit
Um, and that's why I'll leave that question with you two.
I'd be interested in your answers-
Mm
... to whether in fact it is the National Library or the archives-
... that are perhaps the better curator for that MCH.
Well, we certainly operate as a system, as a heritage system.
We collaborate really closely with our colleagues at Te Papa Tongarewa-
Yeah
... and MCH, and right across Archives New Zealand and the
National Library both have system leadership roles, which we take really
seriously, and so we, uh, continually engage and work to support
each other and collaborate. Uh, I think there's always more that can be done in
that space.
Yeah.
So the door is open in terms of that, Rachel.
So did you want to talk about the role of the National Library in terms of
preservation-
Mm
... of websites?
Yeah.
Mm.
Um, so that is something that
is part of our mandate.
Yeah.
So we collect and preserve information that's published,
and that includes online information and includes websites.
Uh, so we do a whole of domain harvest once a year, a
snapshot of everything. Uh, but we also have specific
websites that we preserve and collect and make accessible.
So if we asked, final question there, if we asked who the ultimate
guardian of these, um, uh, national memories
is, it really sounds as though it's the National Library more than anybody else.
Well, I think-
So if you saw others who were not doing what you thought they would do, you would
sort of-
Absolutely
... say, "Hey, you've got to do something about that," or alternatively-
Yeah. And our collection policy does state that-
Yeah
... is that, if it's of national significance,
uh, we're the repository for it. Um, the Turnbull Library
collections are kept in perpetuity.
Uh, archives collections are kept according to their, um,
uh, disposal authority and we take
that responsibility very seriously.
Mm. Do you think that's a common thread between Archives New Zealand, the National
Library, and the Alexander Turnbull, is that they are holding the documentary
heritage for New Zealand. And so making sure that these
institutions are working in an integrated way together in partnership with
other ministries like MCH is extremely important.
Yes, absolutely. And my vision for all of this, um,
work, starting with ANZAC stories, is to actually make it more accessible to
people because, you talk to an average man on the street, they can't
tell you that they've ever engaged with the archives before.
Um, National Library is not much better.
But given that we have such a digital focus now of preserving our material and
making sure it's online for all,
how do we ensure that it's actually used by people?
Yeah. Right.
Well, thank you. Limana.
Thank you. Um, Minister, I'd just like to go back to, um, foreign
emergency in terms of, um, Internal Affairs cuts, and I
wanted to understand better, um, or have a breakdown
from you in terms of cuts, um, to the, uh,
Internal Affairs. And do you receive regular updates from the
department in terms of the vote specific of those cuts?
Uh, is there anything in particular when you're referring to the cuts?
I'm just conscious 95% of the funding is actually through levies rather
than government funding.
Get that, and we understand that the Crown
contribution is maintained at $8 million.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but specifically, uh, a number of us or
I specifically have visited fire stations at the request of those, and
there is real concern around their fleet management.
Mm.
Which, um, you know, that we're doing an inquiry on, but specifically
around the reduction, um, of the vote in
terms of foreign emergency.
Look, when it comes to fire and emergency
and the overall confidence that I have in
their asset management and fleet procurement and property management,
um, it's clear that fire and emergency is on a continuous path of improvement.
Um, and that's where my confidence in fire and emergency comes from.
In past years, they have not had plans, um,
whereas in this term of government, we at least have an asset management
plan. Now, the difficulty here comes from how that
plan is then going to be actioned. Um, the last meeting I had
with the board, I was given an assurance that they are actually on
track, uh, with their asset management plan.
However, uh, the difficulty is squaring that away,
uh, with the information that then comes to me, uh,
from some of my officials. And so, if I think
of, uh, the fact that, um,
we have a little bit of a discrepancy between what I'm being currently
told of that we are actually meeting our asset management versus the
fact that, um-
Are not
... I don't necessarily believe that they will actually deliver their capital
program this year.
Um, I'm also advised that this year, uh, there is
again going to be an underspend of about 24 million
against a forecast of 117 million due to delays
in property and fleet procurement.
Um, and I'm aware that this is not an isolated occurrence.
It's reflecting a pattern of persistent under delivery against
planned investment, um, as well as
a projected end cash position of
152 million.
And so even if we do allow for, um, 50 million set
aside for emergencies and liquidity, um, the level of cash on
hand is difficult to reconcile with any suggestion that
affordability is the primary constraint on delivery.
So there is a difficulty here that the money is there.
The money is available. It has been set aside.
There is an asset management plan.
The board assures me that they are meeting that plan.
However, the figures coming through don't necessarily
Align with the fact that they are meeting that plan.
So I feel I need to push back a little bit on the fact that the vote
or something there has been a cut, because I disagree.
The money is there. However, the assurance that I can
give to this committee is that,
from a few days' time, we will have Ravin Chadha
in charge of the board, who has a significant background in
infrastructure as well as capital investment, and I'm meeting with
him today, setting in place my desire to
ensure that capital investment, fleet management, property
procurement is front of mind for the board from the start of his term.
Thanks, Minister. I'm just wondering,
so I've been informed that the training for
new firefighters coming through has been reduced.
Are you concerned that that's what fire and emergency
or, sorry, the firefighters have informed members, in
particular bringing new firefighters through, but we've been
informed that there's only going to be one training school this year?
For that level of detail, I'd have to bat to officials, and
particularly to fire and emergency.
I'm not aware of any particular change specifically
within the training modules. That level of detail is getting
into a little bit too niche-
Sure
... for my to my level.
That's fine.
But the thing that I would ask the committee to also focus on, which I'm
also focusing on here, is that we do have a levy-based system
currently.
Yes.
We have a requirement to make sure that we are funding fire and
emergency
to the level where they can sustain the programs of work that they need to, to
ensure that New Zealanders are safe, they are being supported in their time of
need,
and importantly,
that we are investing for the future.
Now, the difficulty comes with the discrepancy that seems to
appear between what their plans are now in place versus what
is actually happening in practice, and that's what I'll be keeping a focus on.
That's what I'll be asking the new board chair to be keeping a focus on.
However, it is also the case that FENZ has gone through a
continuous improvement. If you look at a few years
ago, procurement was pretty much put on hold.
There was an issue with fleet procurement, and so nothing was
bought for a number of years, which put us into a hole.
Yeah.
At least we have an asset management plan that should be followed.
The question is, will it be followed?
Okay. I've got a couple of subs. I've got one from Mike.
Thank you. Thanks, Minister. I just kind of want to get clarification, I guess,
around what the
role of the department is when it comes to FENZ-
Hmm
... in terms of the monitoring of what FENZ does and the
reporting and the review. And I guess, so how much is
budgeted in the upcoming financial year to do that
work?
Hmm.
I would have to refer to my officials for the specific budget figure on how much is
set aside for the monitoring function.
But I think it's pretty clear, once again, that there has been a
constant level of improvement through this period of term.
With the level of monitoring that has been provided
to my office, it hasn't been at what I would consider to be a
satisfactory level. Definitely wasn't at the start, but it has been
under constant improvement.
From the start, too often the advice that I received reflected
word for word what fire and emergency was saying rather than doing an
analysis of whether or not that was true and
accurate and factual,
or challenging fire and emergency independently as a
monitor to push back on what fire and emergency was
providing.
Through my term,
we've gone through that level of improvement, and now the
monitoring agency is actually pushing back and asking more leading
questions of fire and emergency to elicit more information.
I
guess I've kind of been shocked that that's how the process had been working for a
number of years. However, the department is going through a
process to strengthen its monitoring function and I'm sure Amanda
can talk to that.
I might just make some opening comments, mate. Thanks.
Great.
So, the minister's been really clear around setting her
expectations from the department in relation to our monitoring
activities.
There has been a uplift program in relation
to monitoring that has resulted in some changes to the way that we go
about this work. In particular, establishing an
agreed monitoring framework with FENZ, but also
lifting the capability within the monitoring function,
including the appointment now of a chief advisor to oversee all of the
monitoring activity that occurs on behalf of the department.
But I'll hand over now to Amanda just in relation to budget and any other comments
you'd like to make.
Thank you.
Yes, the minister and the chief executive have been very clear to me.
I'm a new permanent appointment as the deputy secretary that has responsibility in
this space. We are needing to focus on
ensuring that the minister receives the information that she needs
to understand where things are up to with Fire and Emergency New Zealand, and we
need to do that in a way that moves from reporting information
to giving intelligence, and that's the journey that the organization has been on
over the last year and will continue to do so with our new people
in role as well to support the team.
In terms of the actual budget, I don't have the number, but I do have the number of
people that we have in that space. So we have six people in our monitoring
and appointments team going forward, plus the new chief advisor role,
and some dedicated focus from me and my deputy secretary role as well.
We will be working with the new chair of the board to ensure that the
monitoring agreement sets out a relationship that really
clearly meets the need of the board and the minister and allows the board to carry
out the primary role monitoring FENZ, and then we have the support
role in terms of supporting the minister.
Thank you. Tim?
Yeah, can I just follow up three really, hopefully, short questions, short answer
points that were raised and answered?
So, the first one is, Minister, just to be clear, the
issue as you see it is not how much money FENZ are getting, but how they're using
it. Is that a fair summary?
Absolutely.
In terms of the monitoring that was just raised by Mr Davidson.
So,
I understand there's new work going into it that's really encouraging to see.
Do you think that that information that's been coming from FENZ to DIA,
has that been robust enough or in enough detail
when we look ahead at what's going to happen with the new chief advisor or the new
approach to this?
Look, I think there does need to be pressure on Fire and Emergency as an
organization to be far more accountable and upfront with the information that they
are providing, both to my office and to the board.
This is not a new issue. This has been continuous.
Okay.
And really goes back to even originally when I was setting the
Fire and Emergency Levy back in 2024,
when
the information that was provided for consultation on what that levy
should be wasn't actually up to date, even by Fire and
Emergency. We went out and consulted on old information.
Once, when questioned, was updated and revised, which is how we went
down from a 5.2% figure to a 2.2% figure,
because the modeling was simply out of date based on the forecasts.
Now, I would expect that Fire and Emergency actually keeps accurate,
up-to-date forecasts, especially when we're dealing with something as important
as setting a levy for years into the future.
It is a constant battle with Fire and Emergency of eliciting
the correct information and going back and forth.
However, that real difficulty should be challenged by the
board to the chief executive, through down to the
senior leadership team.
And I'm very hopeful that with having the new chair in place, and with the
expectations I'll also be setting today in my meeting with him,
that he is also of the position of ensuring more accountability from
that top level all the way down through the system.
Yeah, and that's a nice segue to the third one, which was just,
you've mentioned a couple of times new board chair.
Can you tell us how that came about and why the previous board chair was
replaced?
So, the previous board chair was replaced
simply because I've decided not to reappoint.
When I first arrived as a minister in this
portfolio, one of the first things I did was reappoint
members to that board based on the information that
DIA provided me at the time, which is they believed the board was
working satisfactorily, and that there was a need, given that there had been a
change within Fire and Emergency, for continuity of the board.
I've now been of the position, having watched that board in action, that
there was need for change.
Now, the difficulty is finding good people who actually want to be
on the Fire and Emergency board. So, I'm very, very pleased
that we have had Ravin Jesudaram put his hand up.
That is also why I have increased the fees on that Fire and
Emergency board, because they were very low for what is
essentially overseeing close to $900 million a year of
levy funds.
Now, I understand there are some people in this room who would be against us
increasing the board fees, but given that we are responsible for that
level of money and public oversight and accountability, putting up the
board fees does mean that we actually get a much higher level of governance.
Thank you.
Thank you, and Andy.
Yeah, look, obviously, as you're well aware, we're going through a process of
looking at FENZ in some detail, and also the relationship between FENZ and
DIA as the monitoring entity.
Mm.
But I just wondered if there are any lessons from this, for
DIA monitoring generally, because quite clearly it's not
been, I mean, you've said yourself already,
initially it was a repeat what FENZ said, which is not really
particularly analytical.
But are there also any messages or any lessons that there might be from this about
monitoring generally, not just for DIA-
Mm
... and I think about it across the whole of the government sector.
Are there things which we are not doing the monitoring as well as, or government
departments are possibly not doing the monitoring as well as they should have been
for their agencies they are responsible for?
Yeah, look, I think there's quite a lot of truth in that.
I think it's very easy,
in part, when you have Crown entities,
to simply tick the box and say, "Have they been meeting a specific
KPI that has been set?" And so, we can put it into the green,
or has it been slightly below target, so we'll put it into the red,
and give a very simple progress update.
I do actually think there is quite a lot of work that should happen across the
public sector to ensure transparency and accountability for
ministers making decisions when entities are supposed to be kept
at an arm's length from the minister in terms of the operations.
I think there has been quite a lot of hands-off approach within previous
governments, and I'd be very-
This is across the board.
Yeah.
I don't just wear this hat, I also wear other hats where the monitoring
of teams has not been at the level I would believe is
sufficient for the level of money
that is being given to different organizations across
government.
However, that is slightly outside of my DIA portfolio scope.
It was just the lessons of my-
But I do believe it's really important that we take
public accountability very seriously, especially when we're dealing with hundreds
of millions of dollars rather than just ticking boxes.
But that's a level of public sector accountability and scrutiny that should be
happening by chief executives from every government department.
Yeah
Good. Just in support of the minister's comments.
So yes, there are lessons for us. We had an
independent review done of our monitoring function
following the concerns that the minister raised, and I'll get Amanda to speak
more to that in a moment. I think one of the lessons for us, as
much as the minister talked about the need for
boards of complex organizations to have the capability to be able to run
them, equally, we need to make sure that the monitoring capability reflects
the risk and complexity that different Crown
entities present.
Yeah.
So running a standard model of monitoring regardless
of the size of the operation, the complexity of the operation, in this case,
the complexity of
asset management, large assets over time that need to be well-maintained.
That requires a different capability in your monitoring
role in order for the correct
standard of monitoring to be able to occur.
But I'll get Amanda to talk in a little bit more detail around the independent
review.
Yeah. Those are exactly the things that we've been focusing on and the review
looked at. I think it's important to look at it in the context of the Public
Service Commission's guidance that was released in March this year, which really
asks all agencies to lift up their focus in terms
of the monitoring that they're doing.
Nice of the commission to like that.
Yeah. And put a real focus on that. And for us,
as has been said, some of the key things that we need to focus on is having a
focused monitoring approach that works for each entity that
we look after or support, not just having a
generic over the top. And I think that's particularly important for
us in the context of us obviously from one July also having a relationship now with
SafetyNet. Now it's a Crown company, so it's a different entity again,
but we need to make sure that we are thinking about that in the right context
alongside the other agencies that we're looking after.
Thank you. And look, can I ask one other question, because it's on the same, the
FENZ issue anyway.
Mm-hmm.
It's a question I've asked you before,
which is around the levy and the makeup of the way in which it's funded.
Yeah.
So the vast majority, the 95% being levy.
Obviously the property sector's not wild on that given that so much of what FENZ
does actually is property related.
Has there been any policy work whatsoever done to look at, because we
see how FENZ allocates their hours and how many call-outs they got for various
different, whether it's property related or health related or
whatever else it might be. But it does feel like it's unbalanced at the moment.
I would tend to agree with you. Look, the government hasn't taken a position
on the levy. However, as a minister, I have,
which is that I personally don't believe it is fair in the way that it is
currently established. We are asking people who
have insurance contracts and private insurance contracts
to fund severe weather event responses as well as medical
event responses,
as well as fund people who have never bought private insurance.
Mm.
So we have a free rider issue as well as
paying for a public good through
private insurance. I have asked my officials to look at a
range of different topics and options for how we could
fund it as an alternative. But I also want to be clear that I am
aware that under previous Labor governments, they looked into
this issue and then decided not to make any change, and they decided
that the insurance market was the correct
response and to continue with that model.
It is possible that when my officials come back and look at what are
all the feasible alternatives for how you would fund the system,
they also come to that view. It is also possible, however, that
with the scope that I've given them, that they come to a different
understanding.
There are a range of different options that could be on the table, and I'm asking
my officials to look for advice from local government
as well as the Insurance Council. And I really hope
that they come back with a fulsome report of not just what is technically feasible,
but what could be easily implemented through a
transition as well. One of the reasons why I've
announced that I'm doing that work now rather than later
or earlier is because this has been something on my mind for a little
while, but I didn't want to confuse the insurance
industry sector, while we were also putting in place the
first levy for the fire and emergency system
itself. So that comes live very shortly,
and we passed the Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill for
Internal Affairs to ensure that that levy would actually be in
place. And so that's what my focus has been on for the last two and a half
years. However, there is still an element of is it
fair, given that the old fire system was simply
about fire, but when fire and emergency came through in
2017, it was not just about fire.
It was about severe weather events as well as medical emergencies and a range
of other activities. The latest statistic that I've seen from my
officials, that is around only
59% of call-outs for fire and
emergency are related to fire, which includes false alarms.
The rest is non-fire related activity.
So there's an issue there. Sorry, can I just finish?
So the timing for that work, I'm delighted that you're doing the work, the timing
for that work, and will there be some engagement process with
stakeholder
sectors
in helping to inform the
thinking?
That's right. So DIA won't be coming up with ideas
simply by themselves. They'll be going out,
asking for stakeholder feedback.
In terms of the timing, I'm very clear that we are also coming up close
to an election period, and it wouldn't, I
believe, be in good faith for me as the minister to be making a
decision or going to Cabinet straight before an election on what
I believe a new funding model should be or whether or not it should be there.
I simply want to set up future governments to have as much information as
possible to make the best decisions for the time
That they are there rather than myself.
So I've tasked my officials to come back, at least
before the election,
to my office with the information, but I am still not sure at this stage
whether or not that information would be public.
It would simply be setting up future governments to have all the information on
hand.
Great. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. I think this will be the last question, so over to Lamanga.
Thank you, Chair. Minister, I'm not sure that
I can ask this, but I'm going to ask it anyway, changes in the lottery grants
system. There's been a reduction, and I've seen
the analysis that has been presented.
Can you just talk a little bit about that, because that's coming live very soon?
Yes, absolutely. So look, this has been one of the
frustrations I've had as minister, has been the lottery grant
system through my term in government.
There have been a very, very large number of people appointed
to distribution committees. I believe it's over 90 appointments that I need
to make.
Through the process, I have been
surprised at how difficult it has been to ensure that
we have members on those distribution committees, and I believe even at the
moment, they are not currently all full.
One of the reasons why I've decided to move away
from the
large scale,
the word is failing me at the moment for some reason, the specialist committees,
and move towards the regional model is this is actually something that
was agreed by the lottery
grants board as a direction of travel.
I've simply, as a minister, gone a little bit further in saying, "Well,
yes, we will streamline and go into the regional model," which was supported by the
board, "but we will make it fewer regions."
The rationale behind that is simply efficiency from
a point of view from the secretary function,
as well as myself in the ministerial office.
I do expect that money to still get out the door to communities, and
there hasn't been any change in terms of who can
access the funding.
So there is a continued commitment to support priority groups named within the
Gambling Act,
including Māori, Pacific peoples, older people, ethnic communities,
women, youth, and disabled people.
And all of those needs are being actively considered as part of the implementation
alongside support from community advisors.
But the other thing that I do know is that because we've had so
many committees and so many different specialist functions, it has
actually been quite difficult for an ordinary member of our New Zealand
public to know how they ask for funding
from our lottery grant system. It hasn't been as clear as it should be.
Now, the process will be if you live in a specific region, you go
to that specific region for funding.
You don't have to pick and choose which particular division
your funding should be coming from.
That will be then dealt with by the secretary function,
who will then
figure out whether it's an overall nationwide project or a regional
based project.
We can't ask any more. Sorry, we've come to the end of our time.
Right at the end.
Thank you, Minister.
Thank you.
And thank you to Ryan and your team.
It's wonderful to have you here.
That's great.
Local
government. Welcome, Minister, and welcome to your team here.
We've got you to 10:15, but I just want to let you know that I'm going to
be leaving for another session halfway through or-
Mm-hmm
... a third of the way through, perhaps.
And so Tim will take over at that stage.
So Minister, I am going to hand to you.
You've probably got a short
start to this, and then we will open up questions.
So over to you
Great. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair, members of the committee.
A pleasure, big pleasure to be here and honored to be the
Minister of Local Government and to have the portfolio that is
key to delivering positive economic and social outcomes for New
Zealanders. I'm joined at the table here with Catriona Casey, who's
the acting Deputy Secretary for Internal Affairs, and my
other officials as required. Our local government plays an important role in New
Zealand with a significant influence on infrastructure, economic development,
planning, and local communities.
We have a significant work program underway in
local government, starting with the delivery of water services and moving
into the structure of local government.
It's important that we continue that work to ensure that local government is fit
for purpose, represents value for money, and is delivering the best
results for, and outcomes for ratepayers.
As minister, this has been and remains a priority
for me. Having reliable and financially sustainable water
services is a key priority for this government.
The Local Water Done Well programme has seen plans put in place for every
council, providing a clear way forward for investment and delivery.
Overseeing delivery of these plans will be significant, and also ensuring public
services are delivered efficiently is also a priority.
New Zealanders are concerned about the increase in their council tax bills,
and local councils must focus on delivering the core
services and greater efficiencies to manage costs.
This is why we're implementing a rates capping policy.
Doing so will help ensure councils live within their means and keep rates
increases at a manageable level. Simplifying local government is
also a key area of reform underway by this government.
It will help reduce duplication of services, speed up decision-making, and
help councils make better
decisions and work together. Local councils have already signaled their
keenness to progress this work, and we have provided a voluntary
fast-track option for those who want to go faster in this area.
It's important that we do this in order to support the new planning system, which
will also come with the Resource Management Act reform that is currently
underway.
The City Regional Deals programme is also a key area of reform that we have
underway, supporting greater partnership between central and local government in
areas that matter to unlock economic growth and potential.
The local government systems improvement legislation going through the House at the
moment will also help reduce the regulatory burden on
councils. Reviewing the dog control legislation will also be a
focus for the coming year. New Zealanders are rightly concerned about dog
attacks and the surging number of unregistered dogs.
The current legislation is no longer fit for purpose.
Finally, a new Ministry for Cities, Environment, Regions
and Transport will be established on the 1st of July 2026.
This will bring together the ministries, the environment, housing,
transport, together with the local government policy and operational functions from
the Department of Internal Affairs.
It will bring together key legislative and regulatory functions support effective
local government, making central government more coordinated and
streamlined in how it works with councils.
I'm pleased to see such a comprehensive and ambitious set of changes introduced
by this government. And Madam Chair, thank you very much for the
opportunity to be here with the committee this morning, and I'd welcome any
questions you may have.
Thank you, and I'll take the first question from Tangi Te Kiri.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Minister, for your time today.
Just got a series of hopefully quick questions around local government reform to
start things off, particularly around the Head Start process that
you've identified.
Essentially, the government has given councils a three-month or
90-day period to engage with communities around whether or not
they are going to avail themselves of the Head Start process.
Do you think that is going to be a sufficient period of time to ensure that
there aren't any perhaps
opportunities where councils are willing to engage but maybe just don't have the
time in terms of capacity to be able to do that appropriately?
Yes. Well, first and foremost, I'll refer you to the document guidance for Head
Start, which includes a timeline table there in the pack, which
actually outlines the full steps through to 2028, including the
date in which you're referring to on the 9th of August, which is when we
expect councils who choose to do so to
submit outline proposals at that point.
That is the first milestone on that journey towards
2028 reforms. And again, as the foreword of this
document outlines very clearly at the start that this is
a voluntary process, and we have consulted
with local government councils across the country, and their
feedback was very clear. A number of them want to
progress with reform, a number of them want to get on with that process,
and the Head Start process provides them with that mechanism to do so.
If councils are not in the position to meet the requirements of the Head Start
process, then that is their choice.
This is a voluntary process and is not mandatory for any council to make a
submission into that process.
Have you heard yourself from councils who have
expressed a desire to have a little bit longer than
the three-month timeframe?
It'd be fair to say that, and as you know, we have 67
councils across the country. There is a range of views in
regards to that. But the consultation which we did in a
public manner over the Christmas period
came back with clear feedback from a wide range of councils that they wanted a
process that allowed them to lock in the first stage of their
reform process before the 2028 local body
elections to give them time to bed that change in, hence the Head Start
process put in place, that allows a mechanism for those who
choose to submit a plan to do so. It'd be fair to say that there
are some councils that are
Are less advanced in regards to their planning around how they may look to
simplify their functions. That is not a surprise.
And for those councils, they should take their time in regards to planning
what will work for their communities.
What we're interested in is the councils that do have a clear understanding of
where they want to go and how they want to get there.
We now have a mechanism to, in effect, take on board their plans and
progress legislative reform in their area.
Again, there's going to be differing groups depending on what they choose.
The alternative, of course, is what you have described as the backstop.
Are you satisfied that there is sufficient information out
there around what the backstop will actually look like for those that don't
voluntarily engage in this process?
Well, the government outlined when we released our guidance
for the broader reform of local government, when we stipulated that we
will be removing regional councils from the 2028 election period.
And the feedback from that consultation process
was very clear. There were a number of councils that looked
at the backstop proposal that we
consulted upon and said, "Look, we believe there's changes and
modifications to that model." There were others that said, "We want the ability to
actually structure our own governance to meet our requirements within our local
area," which was different to what we consulted on.
The feedback across the board by Cabinet was that we will
continue to take feedback in regards to
that backstop process and the final design of it, of which Cabinet has
not made a decision on the final design at this point.
However, we will look to do that in 2027.
Right here, right now, we are focused on working with those councils
that have a clear plan around what they want to do and working with them to
support them to make an application under the Head Start pathway.
And between those two mechanisms, on the 9th of August, we'll know
who has applied on the Head Start and who hasn't, and then we'll be able to
work with all councils. The key objective here is
to ensure that we move from where we are today to a more simplified local
government model.
And the feedback I've had, and it's positive to hear, is that the opposition
parties are supportive of this direction of travel.
And the voluntary nature of which is important because it
allows communities to move. But there are communities that are moving at different
pace.
One of the changes that you have recently announced is
in relation to voting rights on council committees.
Now-
Sorry, can I sup on that last one, please?
Can we just get a sup on that?
Oh, sure.
Is that okay?
I'm in the same space to sup on that one.
That was a sup, your one?
Well, the first part was, yeah.
Okay. So Andy, sup. Tim might sup.
So have you finished on this particular issue then?
I only have one more issue in terms of reform around the committee
voting stuff.
So if we just go to Andy, was a sup on that one.
So look, thanks, Minister. I've talked to many mayors
since the announcement, and every one of them has said that the
three months doesn't give enough time to do
a realistic job in putting something together.
And I understand that all you want is something that's quite light in terms
of the detail.
The bit that's glaringly missing in the DIA
document is engagement with community.
And
I just wanted two parts of it, the two things which have been raised for me, the
ability to engage meaningfully with community.
And secondly, the ability to be able to do the numbers properly, because those do
matter.
And also whether, particularly for smaller councils, whether government will
consider assisting in that latter part as well, because that's,
for small councils
that are budget stretched, that is a real burden.
So those two first areas of question, and I've got one more.
Yeah, absolutely. Well, first and foremost, the government understand that
local government is under significant pressure in regards to change and
reform. The purpose of the Head Start process,
again, reinforcing is the foreword of our ministerial
foreword, and I would encourage members to read that wording there,
which clearly states the Head
Start pathway is a direct response to feedback.
It provides a voluntary, streamlined option for councils
that want to lead transition early.
And that is the mechanism for those to do so.
There will be councils that are not in that position, and that is
understood. The government has been clear that we want a regional
governance of local government to be simpler and more
efficient. And with the RMA reform that is coming through,
now is the opportunity and time to look at that.
So there will be a number of councils that are not going to be in a position,
because they have not done the work or are in a position to make a decision, that
will choose voluntarily not to submit a plan.
And that is what we would expect. That is normal process.
Again, the feedback from the consultation was there are a
grouping of councils around the country that do know what they want to do
and do have a clear plan of how they want to do it, and they want to get on with
it. And so the government has made the decision that we should not
set the pace of any simplification reform by the slowest council,
but actually the opposite. We should provide a mechanism for those that are at the
front of the queue. And I think it's important to not get the two
aspects
mixed up. There is in effect two groups, and the Head Start
process is dealing with the group that are ready to
move.
So the Head Start could be, we are ready to move, move, carry on
through, or we hope we're ready to move, we'll do this
work, and then they might, if they can't make that fall to the backstop.
That's possible.
That is possible, yes. There is criteria that we've outlined in
regards to the Head Start process, which councils and a
minimum of two councils would need to submit a plan in order to do that.
And that criteria is clear. And our officials, or
my officials from DIA, are actively out there on the ground
working with councils to help them and support them on the plan.
This should be a no surprises approach.
On the 9th of August, if a council or grouping of councils submits a plan,
there would've been plenty of opportunity to test and sense check
that with officials to ensure that their assumptions are aligned
with the expectations, the criteria of which the government has set.
At that point, we'll work through.
Again, I go back to the timeline between now and 2028.
The period that we have in order to undertake this reform
is between now and 2028.
The 9th of August is a milestone on that journey
for some councils, but not all.
And, that is important because what we do know is, is that
if we try and reform and do everything to everyone at the same
time, that has a significant pressure on the system.
And we want to make sure that we spread that, pass that
burden across the broader sector.
And finally, given that you said that the backstop is
fluid in terms of what it might actually look like, and you'll seek input
and guidance and feedback on that, is there anything stopping
collections of councils doing work that doesn't-- they can't, even if they can't
make the front end,
that they can be doing work during the period between now and 2028, which will
actually help inform that backstop and say, "Well, actually, we've come to the view
that it is, it looks like this for us."
And that helps inform the backstop process for any given
area.
Yeah. It's really important to clarify that any
councils that do not opt into the headstart
process will not face any mandatory
change by government until after the
2028 local elections. It gives all councils space
and time to work through the detailed needs of their community
and their requirements. Regional councils will not-- councils
will not exist beyond 2028.
Yep.
So it's between now and then that all councils have to work out
how that future state is going to operate most effectively for their communities.
I'm confident that that period of time between now and 2028
elections provides adequate time to work through this process.
What's most important for
government, and actually getting feedback from councils and mayors and ratepayers,
and actually feedback that I've heard from aspects of
the opposition is, is that any reform needs to be enduring,
and it needs to avoid a mechanism where, in effect,
there is a position of change of that fundamental
policy. So let's take the time, let's not compromise.
Let's not compromise on quality for speed.
Let's make sure that we work through that, and that's what we're doing.
Thank you.
Okay. Tim.
So just wanted to pick up two things you said.
One,
relating to Mr. Foster's first question.
So
I don't even know if you have an example, I've certainly heard it, but councils
that were asking for this headstart, for that faster pathway.
And secondly, because I'm thinking of one of the councils that spoke to me, but
then when I think of one of the smaller ones, like Kapiti, there's some
people there, I don't know if it's scaremongering or if it's truth, but they're
worried that smaller councils could get subsumed through this process.
Do-- What-- How would you respond to that?
Yeah, absolutely. So,
look, as I said, and I'm happy for officials to give a bit-- Maybe Hemi could give
us a bit of an overview of the feedback from the consultation at a high level.
That would be helpful.
Yeah. So through the submissions analysis, a lot of the feedback that we got was
that broadly, there was an acknowledgment that local government did need to
reform. But really where they differed in their views was in how that
reform might take place. And they were obviously responding to the draft
proposal, which was to set up those combined territory boards and
then to run a regional reorganization process that took two
years.
And so when they did come back and feedback, the majority of them said they didn't
particularly like the combined territories board model.
Many of them thought they had existing governance forums where they were
collaborating
well together that they thought were more appropriate to plan
reorganization through. And often that might be the mayoral
forums in the given regions. But that wasn't all regions, but in many
places it is.
They did see some merit in having to do regional
reorganization plans, but what did come through were two distinct
groups. One that said, "It's too fast to ask us to plan
regional reorganization within two years, at the same time as having to
implement the resource management reforms," particularly looking at things like
spatial plans. But another group that said, "Actually, we can do it
faster than that two-year period you're asking us to do it through." And so
that's really what influenced the advice that we provided to the
government about having these two pathways, being the headstart
pathway and the backstop. They didn't say
how fast they could go. It was primarily, "We can go faster
than the two years you've put in your draft proposal." And so that was
generally what influenced the design of the policy as it-
The second bit about the smaller councils, like Kapiti don't want to get sucked
into Wellington. Are they going to,
um-
So as part of the broader reform process, if we look at the
backstop in effect, right? So on the basis that a small council doesn't submit
a plan as part of the headstart and they are part of the backstop, then they are
going to need to work through and consider what
their functions and activities will look like in a world where the regional
council, as it exists today, does not exist.
And how does that work in the context of how they operate?
And the opportunity to look at how could those
services operate in the region in which your specific
council is part of as well. That is very much for them
to work with their neighbors around and to consider and
to work with officials on But from our point of view, there is
adequate time for them to work through that model and consider
that. And likewise, the government in parallel will be considering the
broader backstop provisions, taking on board feedback, learning
from some of the feedback we get from the headstart, which may help inform what
that backstop looks like as well, and then make formal policy
decisions around that in '27.
Okay, we've got one more sup on this topic from Mike, and then we'll move to a
primary from Tangi.
Thank you.
I'm just wondering if the messaging's come out well to the
local government councils. Because from what I've seen in
the country I was getting in was they'll kind of a little bit lineside a bit they
said, but we've seen-- obviously there have been councils that were ready, but then
there appears to be
a lot that have been scrambling, trying to get themselves
sorted,
and realizing that there's just not enough time to do proper community
engagement, but they're still trying to get it done within
this sort of period of time.
But are you saying therefore, if they don't actually go for this
headstart and they go into the backstop, all it is is
basically a longer period of time and there's no difference apart from
that. So they'll actually have the time to work with their
surrounding neighbors, neighboring councils to come up with a
unitary authority.
Is that what you're-
There will be a more fixed
design of what the governance model would operate
like in a future state. The benefit of a headstart, it
is in effect a blank sheet.
Groupings of councils can provide a plan that
is customized to their specific requirements in regards to how
they want to govern their
grouping of councils, which is maybe
different to what the backstop provision was and
is finally designed. So I would say that the
backstop process will have less flexibility.
However, we are open and listening to feedback
around refining that backstop process from what we
consulted on with them
at the early part of this year, and we'll make some final decisions around
that policy design in '27. So they're going to have
time to work their way through that,
and I think it'd be fair to say that the feedback we get through
the headstart process will be helpful to design a
backstop process that is fit for purpose.
Thanks.
Probably just one thing to raise on that.
If you are a council or series of councils that choose not
to go into headstart and the government
approves a headstart proposal from other councils in
your region, that will obviously influence
what options are available for councils that
choose not to be part of that arrangement in the backstop.
So headstart does influence
potentially what the backstart options are going to
be,
if the headstart options are approved in terms
of what some councils come up with.
And in terms of the production, where does the budget
lie?
The budget?
Yeah, for the work that you're doing.
So,
we have over two years, the current financial year
and the next financial year,
three and a half million.
Yep.
And that's
for the policy and legislative work
that needs to be done,
and decisions haven't been made beyond that point.
Okay. And so I'm just get
my head straight around this. Looking at
MCERT vote,
the local government policy and related services sits under the minister
responsible for RMA reform. Is that-
So the
local government functions going into MCERT, there will
still be a minister of local government,
and those responsibilities will still be
portfolio responsibilities for minister.
The functions themselves
do, at the moment, they're being kept together and do
fit into MCERT in the policy
function.
But there will still be a minister for local government, and it'll still
be a portfolio responsibility.
And one last sup on this.
Yeah.
The reforms that are affecting local government
obviously come at quite a significant cost to local government.
And I did ask the question, the pre-hearing questions about this, and
there was no depth looked in that. But is there any
compensation to councils? Because there's this, I
guess, direction of trying to reduce rates, but at the same time, you're creating
reforms that create rates increases.
Is there any compensation to councils that are actually having to actually
spend money to do these reforms?
So,
the objective of the reform is to simplify local government.
The current state of 67 councils includes a
degree of duplication of roles, activity,
across the broader sector, which does have a current cost that's embedded
within what we spend today. A simplified local government would have less
duplication, less bureaucracy, and less functional activity
post RMA reform with the reduction in the number of consents
required by local government to implement.
In the region of, I think the minister's noted, 50%, so quite
significant and fundamental reduction of functional activity
It is inherent in that, that there is a process and a
mechanism to, in effect, design a local government model in the
future that is more efficient and simplified, and therefore lower
cost than the current state.
And that is the mechanism. There is no mechanism formally at
this point to provide compensation or any other funding
mechanism to councils to undertake headstart
proposals or any of that reform. That is part of business as
usual. But if we take a perspective around what local
government will look like three years from now or five years from now,
it is the view that we will have a more simplified local
government, which will have more definition and lack of
duplication of roles and activities, which will mean that the
underlying cost pressure in regards to local government will be
less than what it currently is. And so, that's the mechanism that we're
working through. Local government are well accustomed to reform in many
areas. One of the roles of the Minister of Local Government is
to be aware of the degree of reform and impact
that has on local government, and look to sequence that.
And that's why in this area of reform, we're taking a period over a
period of two years
to progress that through. And that is
important, but it also signifies that change is difficult and challenging.
And again, I go back to the point, and I think the feedback that I've heard across
the board is, is that reform that we undertake in local government needs to be
enduring. It needs to ensure that local government is better placed to
deliver services to rate payers than what it is in the current state, be more
efficient, be more simplified. But importantly, it protects local voice, and I
think the protection of local voice is a key component and criteria
of our model. And that is something, particularly, well, it's across
the board as an area of priority for me as minister.
Okay,
Tangi Te Kere.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm going to move to a new line of questioning, and
it's to deal with the transition for local government
functions across to MCERT.
What was the total cost of transferring the local government
functions over to the new ministry, and where is that cost
located?
So I'll just start firstly by saying that MCERT,
as a entity, will not be in place until the 1st of July
of this year. So as we sit here today,
the transfer of costs and headcount is
something that will occur in the future and has not occurred
at the point at which we are discussing this
committee.
Although,
in terms of the future, this is looking at the estimates in terms of funding
for the future. So there must be some understanding of how much
that is going to cost and what the likely headcount will be in terms of
transfer from DIA across to MCERT.
So the transfer across on 1st of July is like for
like. So the departmental
appropriation that is being transferred is
$20.7 million, and
non-departmental, 128.4
million. The non-departmental being
largely the remainder of the cyclone recovery
funding that's still
working its way through.
So-
Including the local government commission of-
Yes
... which is being transferred as well.
The FTEs transferring across are 93, around about
93.
So it is like for like. It isn't
transferring anything that wouldn't have happened should the
function have stayed in DIA.
Can I... Thanks for the clarity, because I did have a question about headcounts, so
that answers that one. In terms of the local government policy advice, that's
currently looking at 15.7 million.
Yes.
The environmental policy advice in the same vote is
189 million. So what
assurance is there that local government stewardship in terms of advice is
not going to be diluted just by folding it into,
effectively, the MCERT vote?
So, that's probably a matter for the new chief executive
of MCERT. But,
the functions aren't just being folded in.
The route that's being taken is more to design an
integrated structure so that you don't end up with
silos of another nature. The local
government functions will be a prominent part of the
policy area and will have senior managers
associated
with them.
In what I've seen so far,
there is absolutely nothing that is happening or planned to happen
that would dilute the focus on local government.
A lot of that comes down to the funding envelope that exists for
policy advice. So I guess it's a question for the minister.
Are you
confident that local government advice won't be
curtailed as a result of the transition?
We can look at the amount, the 15 odd million versus 189,
so there's a potential of that to be lost in there.
I've heard about the team to try and integrate things.
But do you have confidence in the fact that local government advice will still be
able to flow through
within the different organization in a way that doesn't compromise the nature of
advice?
Yeah. First and foremost, I have been party to the discussions in regards to the
structuring of the new entity alongside colleague ministers who equally
have vote responsibilities. To your question,
yes, I do have confidence.
And it is important that we ensure that the
defined functions and activities that are undertaken in the policy area by local
government, of which we've transversed a number of in today's
discussion- ...
are
supported and to ensure that they maintain that degree of
policy feedback back to ministers as we progress on this reform
agenda that is underway. I'm very proud
of the capability and skill set that I have across
my agencies. Some very hardworking
individuals across the board with great expertise who do
a very positive, and make a very positive contribution to local government.
And so, we'll continue to work progressively on some pretty
significant reform, which in my view will benefit
broader New Zealand in terms of a more simplified local government.
Did officials provide any advice on the risks of moving that
from DIA over to MCERT?
In regards to any transition of activity from one
location to another, there is always going to be
risks, issues, opportunities.
In regards to that, those considerations are weighed up by cabinet as
part of the decision to proceed with the
restructuring and the creation of MCERT.
It was the view of the cabinet that on balance, the
opportunity to bring together those functions and activities, versus
the status quo, was in the best interests of progressing the
broader reform that we have across not only this portfolio area, but others as
well.
Sak.
Yeah, just talking about MCERT, I know that--
first of all, I'll relate back to Auckland City Deal, which was-
Mm
... actually the first ever deal between, yeah, exactly,
from central government with Auckland City.
And it is said that the functionality will be
done by MCERT. How could that actually work in terms of delivery?
Yeah. It's a great question because the Auckland
deal is the first in its kind, and it's the one that has been
signed between obviously the government and
Auckland City in regards to that. The role that MCERT will
play is in effect managing and ensuring that the
governance mechanism to implement that deal does occur,
including
managing and supporting the joint sponsors, which is the
Mayor of Auckland and the Deputy Mayor, and the Minister Bishop
and myself, as in effect forms the sponsors group.
We met for the first time last week to have our first discussion as
a broader group around the progressing the Auckland deal.
And in effect, MCERT in the future state beyond 1st of July,
will provide, in effect, the agency support
to progress that deal. As you know, as a fellow
Auckland MP, there is a significant amount of opportunity that we have in
Auckland to unlock. The Auckland deal focuses on four
growth areas, and a number of other priorities,
including a pest-free Auckland, which is an environmental
benefit as well, and many other factors.
And so,
the role of MCERT being a combination of all of the agencies that we know,
I think is going to be helpful because we have a one-stop shop in the
context of an agency that brings together all of the components that
will be able to support Auckland Council to unlock that
deal. I think-
CRL infrastructure in Mount Albert.
Absolutely. All of which is very, very important.
The
announcement on Sandringham Road, which I know is in your electorate around the
investment to unlock housing-
As a list MP, I have to declare. It's a list MP-
List MP. Yeah
... not the actual MP, but hopefully.
No, noted, but I know that's your home
suburb.
That's-
So, yes.
Great.
Okay. Next primary I had was Honorable Melissa Lee, or was it just the
Sak?
Well,
I was wanting to do a little bit more-
Okay
... on Auckland City Deal, if that's okay.
That's fine. I've finished my primary.
Yeah. To answer your-
Yeah. So there are a couple of-- There's been quite a lot of conversation about
Auckland City Deal, and we just started talking about the
infrastructure
related to CRL, for example. And there are others,
like Eden Park and all of those things.
And there are some people within the electorate who are quite concerned in
terms of, we've had flooding in some areas, and they're concerned
that i- including with PC120, they're saying that
perhaps the infrastructure's actually sort of moving into the suburbs.
Mm.
Are you able to clarify how it will impact the people in Mount Albert, for
example?
Yeah. Well, first and foremost, the purpose of the Auckland Deal
is to ensure that we have alignment and effective partnership
between central government and local government to unlock the opportunities in
Auckland across a range of areas, including infrastructure that you have
referred to. It is a partnership also for growth, and I think
it is important to recognize that Auckland and the deal talks
about four areas of particular growth, of which you've outlined one there at
Eden Park. The
deal structure provides a mechanism to unlock that
growth and in effect, a governance manner to work through.
Local government have levers, central government have levers, the private sector,
iwi Māori, NGO, community have levers.
We need to bring together all five of those
parts of the system together to be aligned.
And also, this is about certainty, and I think we saw some positive
feedback yesterday around infrastructure more broadly at a national level.
If you take that to an Auckland sense, having clarity around what are the
levers and the opportunities for
growth and to make Auckland a more livable city and
that is important. And having
alignment on that is very important.
Auckland is 40% of New Zealand's GDP.
One third of New Zealanders live in there.
It is a gateway to New Zealand,
and it is an economic powerhouse. When Auckland does well, New
Zealand does well. And what we need is just to ensure that we're focused
on ensuring that we have The future for Auckland and, in effect,
New Zealand's future,
well-governed, and making sure that we're working through
aspects around
key enablers, which is housing, jobs, and broader
infrastructure. Plan Change 120 and the aspects around that are obviously part of
the Minister for Housing's responsibilities.
Obviously, as Minister for Auckland, again, I am aware
of those implications. But again,
having a mechanism of government under the Auckland deal to work through where
we've got common issues and challenges and get agreement versus butting
heads, which historically has been one of the challenges, I think is a very
important and landmark step forward from where we were in the past.
How important is... Sorry if I may.
How important is the operation of MCERT in terms of reducing the
bureaucracy that is often actually
the, I guess, the breaking point for a lot of the
growth and,
I guess, prosperous movement that everybody actually wants
Auckland to have or other parts of New Zealand to have?
Well, look, Katrina answered the operational aspect, but I think if you stand back
and think about the silos that exist within central government, and they
exist in other parts of local government and the private sector as well, but silos
in central government,
the ability to break down some of those silos and get the different parts of
the central government engine working together in an
aligned manner
is sort of, at one level, common sense, but two, a reality that
is not the status quo as efficiently as what it could be.
And so the process to bring together MCERT
is based on a premise that we need to be more aligned between our
government agencies when we deal with complex challenges and
opportunities, such as how do you make Auckland a higher growth
city, more livable, and ensure that all the components of that-
Global
... are working together. So that's the premise.
We also have learnings of having done some of this reform under prior
governments in the past as well. And so we have taken on board those
learnings and put that in play for how we move forward.
Sure.
MCERT is a significant shift in
the agencies all being in one place, the critical ones with
housing, transport, planning, and the local government
functions from DIA in a coordinating
role. In putting the deal together throughout that process, each
of those agencies stood alone and had input
into the process.
When MCERT starts up, all of those agencies are in
MCERT and have to own the process, and that's a
key difference from where we are today to where we
will be,
1 July. So MCERT will, and all parts of it
will own the implementation of the deals, rather than
just be standing as an input into them.
So all the mechanisms will be there for the critical
parts. There will still be other agencies, health,
education, and MB, and
others are also needing to be involved.
But the big ones
will be inside MCERT and will all
collectively own the deals and the outcomes from the
deals.
Keith.
Yeah. Supplementary, Madam. Thank you.
I believe there's been two city and regional deals done so far.
So looking forward, what do you expect to happen over the next
12 months? And whereabouts does that sit in
though? And also, what is the impact of the Head
Start program on the city and regional deals?
Yeah. So at this point in time, the government have signed
two city and regional deals, one with
Auckland. The Auckland deal was the first, and the second
is with the Western Bay of
Plenty. We're also currently in negotiation with Queenstown
Lakes in regards to the third deal, which is
currently under negotiation. At this point, cabinet
has not made any formal decisions in regards to
the next
wave of deals that will be
considered. It is part of the coalition agreement between
the ACT Party and the National Party.
So it is part of our broader agenda.
Once we are in a position where the
third deal is
in a position where cabinet has taken decisions around that, then it'd
be expected that we'll be taking some decisions around the
next phase.
We have been very,
I think, impressed with the degree of positivity around getting
alignment on some of the big aspects and decisions between local government and
central government.
Equally, the feedback from councils who have discussed with
opposition members have fed back to me that having
certainty on the big blocks of change is important,
and less headbutting between local government and central government is
positive.
And it is my intent as minister to...
I guess these are modeled off what was done in the UK and Australia across both
sides of the political spectrum, and it lasted multi-decade as well.
I know that my officials have provided briefings to opposition in regards to this.
I'm very open to work collaboratively around these
aspects because I think the enduring nature of these
big-ticket items is important for New Zealand Inc.
And I don't think actually in the main these are political in the context.
There's just the context of certainty around projects that are going to
progress. How that links to how city regional deals links to Head
Start, your second question,
there is no
act The correlation in the
context of the Head Start process versus
these, other than to say that
regions and groupings, and again, this is not predicating who may submit
a proposal or not, but those regions that have been able to come
together to negotiate and work with
government around a city or regional deal have got a higher degree of
maturity around working together as a region than potentially
those that haven't, and therefore, they may be more
progressed in their thinking of working together as a formal region than others.
But that is the only extent that I could draw at this
point. Be interesting to see where we are on the 9th of August in
regards to that, but I don't have any preconceived view around what that will look
like.
So just to confirm, potentially less likely to get a
city or regional deal if you haven't gone into the Head Start
program.
There's no criteria in the city regional deal model that you have to
have in place a Head Start proposal or not. Okay?
Because we've done two already in absence of the Head Start.
That was before.
But it'd be fair to say that in order to do a city regional deal,
you have to be able to come together as a region-
Yeah
...
to get alignment on a clear plan around what you want to do and how and when you
want to do it. And so the
regions that are in that position are generally quite advanced around working
together already.
Okay.
Therefore,
there is
some correlation likelihood that those regions would be better placed than maybe
others to put in place a Head Start proposal.
But again,
that's not a guarantee.
Okay.
Last- Hey, we got- Oh, Sup, or... Yeah, Sup, just one last one.
Yep, Sup, and then we've got primaries from Mike Davidson and Andy Foster. Yeah.
And this should be pretty quick. The Queenstown deal, the component
for that, where does that sit in?
So the Queenstown deal at this stage is still under negotiation between the Crown
and local government. Decisions have not been reached or made in
regards to that
deal at this point.
But as and when it is, then we'll have more to say on that.
Thanks. Okay. And primary, Mike Davidson. Yeah, thank you.
Just in the
current financial year, there was just under 16 million
to support local government with natural hazards, which would
assist them to deliver effective local government services associated
with preventing or responding to adverse natural events or natural
hazards.
I can't see
that
in this upcoming financial year, and I'm just wondering why that's been
discontinued.
Can you just refer to the
page number on that?
The page number 91 for the vote internal affairs.
Right. Okay. So in regards to our broader reform
program around undertaking resilience activity,
there is a number of components that I have within my responsibility.
First and foremost, there is aspects around the broader flood
resilience work that
was previously undertaken by
Minister Mitchell, which is now transferred across to local government.
We do also have broader reform
and funding as part of the Auckland floods as well, which is a
part of that aspect.
So
there's a wide range of activity. That specific page number, I
haven't got it in front of me, but we can... Katrina, maybe.
A lot of the funding is time limited, so it was always time
limited for a specific purpose for specific regions.
On that 16 million, we'll come back
specifically with
where that sits.
But there is,
as I say, that 128.4 million going to insert
non-departmental funding, which is about
flood protection, cyclone recovery.
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay, we've got about 10 minutes left, so Andy Foster.
Yeah. So I want to have a look at an area we haven't covered yet, which is water-
Yes
... and delivery of the water service plans.
The advice we've got here is that the
DIA's initial analysis found that spending on water infrastructure will
increase by $9 billion. So I'm interested in if that
reflects a lot, $9 billion worth of extra work being done, whether you've
seen any efficiencies being proposed in what's being
done as opposed to, so are we getting more than it would've been, 9
billion buys more than 9 billion would've bought previously.
But that sounds like a significant uplift in what the councils were previously
planning to do. Very significant uplift.
And I'm also interested in, are there any concerns about
specific, and I know there are, specific water entities,
and the process for engaging with those water entities
to get them into a sensible shape. And I'd just
say, we had the Infrastructure Commission in front of T and I yesterday.
And they certainly were sort of suggesting that every
one of these water entities is all going to go out all together,
but all at the same time trying to do everything all at once, which will inevitably
mean competition for resources, pushing prices up, et cetera, and
possibly that it's unwarranted to do it that fast.
So, interested in your feedback on that to start with.
Yeah. I've got joined by Laurie Hand, who's the executive
director for water services, who will also provide some input
in regards to this. I mean, first and foremost, just to your point raised, I don't
agree with that statement that, in effect,
all these entities are going to come out at the same time and-
What was implied there is right, because actually, if you look at the facts,
Watercare in Auckland, which is one of the most significant water entities,
is already
in play and operating under this model and has been for a period of
time
and is already working with the market in terms of providing a forward look of
capital investment required over the next decade for
their needs and requirements. The savings or
the implications of the model of, in effect, allowing Watercare
to operate under Local Water Done Well
has had a positive impact in regards to what
was the forecasted increase of water charges under the previous
model. That was circa 27% increase,
which was obviously unaffordable under our Local
Water Done Well. It's in the region of 7%.
It'd be fair to say that now one of the challenges
before Local Water Done Well was is that we had, in effect, water
services across local government that was unregulated.
And we have the Commerce Commission now doing price
regulation, and we have Taumata Arowai, the water quality regulator,
doing water quality regulation. And that is very
positive. Obviously, we know the water quality issues
that we had historically, which is critically important for human health.
But having the Commerce Commission do economic regulation has been a
significant and positive step forward.
It also ensures that the Commerce Commission are able to review the
long-term asset plans of these entities to ensure that they
are, one, aligned to expectation of the needs of their communities, not
gold-plated. What I mean by not doing more than what is required
to meet the standards.
And I think that is fair to say that that has been an issue in the
past. But equally, there has been an impact of
increased costs of infrastructure flowing through, including from the Middle East,
that has flowed through, and you are seeing the price pressure of infrastructure
and water infrastructure
being under pressure as a result of a number of factors that
are lined up against the economy. So,
that's underway. If we stand back by the end of this term,
Local Water Done Well will be implemented.
We will be in a position where virtually all
councils will have a plan in play. We have
two councils currently, one with a facilitator, but one that has
submitted a plan to DIA for assessment, and the other is the Chathams,
which is currently working with the agency around their requirements.
We all know that they are unique in the context of their needs and
requirements, but all other councils have a plan and now are in
implementation.
And
in the main of challenge,
that is a positive aspect because we now have entities that
have the appropriate capability, experience, and expertise, including water
engineers, et cetera, managing and running these.
And these assets are within local ownership and control
and have professional governance and have a regulator around the outside of them.
So again,
feedback from opposition in the context of this is, is that
there may be a differing view around the pace and the
structure. But in terms of having a model that is
under regulation and economic regulation, I think it'd be a view that
is a better position than the previous state.
And just in terms of the spend and bringing that forward.
So I think what you were comparing was the previous 10-year long-term plans
to the water service delivery plans, and you're absolutely right.
There is more investment. So the Local Water Done Well legislation
requires financial sustainability, and part of that definition of
financial sustainability is investment sufficiency.
So what that is doing is requiring that where investment had not been made
and water services were not compliant, that that compliance
is now brought up to standard. So, for example,
in wastewater from 2022 to 2025, there were over
3,000 breaches
of consent conditions, which is doing damage to our environment.
As well, there's, I believe last count, 60 boil
water notices, long-term boil water notices in this country.
And that means there's our communities cut off without access to safe drinking
water. And so what Local Water Done Well is requires
those get remediated under investment
sufficiency.
And so that is what is bringing forward the investment to make sure that those
communities get the services they need to protect their health and their
environment.
What we're seeing, though, from the time the water service delivery plans
were submitted in September of last year to now when the water organizations
have a professional board in place and are really looking to
optimize that, we're actually seeing quite a bit of further optimization of those
plans. So one of them I can call out is He Awa, which is
Hamilton City and Waikato District Council.
In their water service strategy, they actually were able
to
continue their $3 billion of investment over 10 years but lower the
price signal. So they've sent in the water service delivery plan by
34% to
Hamilton City and by 59% to Waikato District Council
by just using some better sequencing of the network and really thinking through
that with some professional engineering standards.
Thank you. And look, just the other one is, are the-
Quick sap here and then a quick sap, Tony, if we can.
Sorry.
Yeah, quickly. So just, are there any entities that
are causing concern, and you're confident the regulatory regime that's
set up COMCO TA will do the job?
Yes. So we currently have, as I said, Waitaki
is one of the councils that have had a facilitator that I
appointed, that has subsequently submitted a plan through to
DIA for their assessment.
And the other council that's currently
working with the Department of Internal Affairs is Chatham Islands.
Chatham Islands. Yeah.
Outside of that, all of the other
councils in the country have their plans approved and are in the
process of implementation of their models.
In regards to
broader concerns and monitoring, as minister, I am keeping a
close eye on the number of water entities across
the board, including Wellington, which would
be one that has been historically
in the news and has been in focus-
Well, aware of that
... for a variety of reasons.
It'd be fair to say that in regards to that situation,
the Commerce Commission, which is the regulator, which has a role to
ensure, particularly around economic regulation, that that regulator is
actively involved in working with that entity alongside others
and providing me with regular updates in regards to that work and
progress. So I'm
satisfied that the regulation model that's currently in
play is doing what it is intended to do.
And we will continue to work with councils
constructively to ensure that this works.
We have to acknowledge that we are in a period of transition to a new
model from a state of governance around water
services that was different to what we currently have.
And that takes time to bed in and implement.
But,
in the main, what we're seeing is, as highlighted by a couple of the examples
in the Waikato alone and other entities, is actually
this is operating as expected.
And with more time as this beds in,
that will give positivity to ratepayers.
Importantly linked to the Head Start, it's another component of
the local government reform area is difficult, because
change and reform and amalgamation and consolidation is challenging,
as in any change process.
But it'd be fair to say the feedback that I've had from councils and mayors across
the country is that they have gained confidence and
capability through the water reform process that they are now
using to apply to the broader simplifying
local government process. And
I think that's an important aspect of building capability in local government and
leadership, that
having experience of amalgamation and consolidation cannot be
taken for granted. But the water reforms has equipped them better than not
having done so to progress reform in the future.
We've got a lightning-fast question to finish with.
Yeah. Are you satisfied that the Commerce Commission have enough
teeth to
do what they need to do?
I am confident in regards to the powers of the regulators to
undertake the activities required
to ensure that they are meeting their, or entities are meeting their
requirements. I meet with the regulator on a regular
basis and do
take feedback in regards to areas of opportunity to
improve and enhance that model. And as minister, I'm
always open to ensuring that our
regulators have sufficient powers and capability to
do their role, and importantly, to protect the New Zealand ratepayer consumer
and
I'll continue to work constructively with them in that area.
Thank you for your time today.
Thank you.
Thank you, committee.
And the committee will suspend until 10:30 when we'll be back to wrap things
up.
Thank you